now Israeli officials say that they are
increasing security screening of Aid
deliveries Bound for Gaza to enable more
supplies to enter the territory the Kum
Shalom checkpoint will not reopen but it
will be used to check deliveries before
they sent through the rougher border
crossing that connects Egypt and Gaza
two Egyptian security sources said
inspections would begin on Tuesday under
a new deal between Israel Egypt and the
United States I'll senior inter National
correspondent funny FAA has more details
we're talking about inspections and not
to be confused with the Karam Shalom
Crossing to be opened which uh is closed
since October 10th actually before that
hundreds of trucks could uh get in and
get out and deliver much needed Aid
hundreds of trucks I'm seeing and right
now the situation is that the trucks can
only get through the rough AB Crossing
but really A Drop in the bucket in the
current situation with the ongoing War
so having said that an additional
inspection a a facility basically there
at the junction between Israel and Gaza
and Egypt and Gaza may start there an
additional in inspection that is much
needed and it's seen really as a ray of
Hope because that would POS possibly
mean to alleviate the pressure on uh uh
with regard to traffic there really
hundreds of trucks there uh uh uh miles
away from the Rua border crossing and
that would mean that more trucks could
possibly get in they still need to go
through rougher border crossing but at
least there's an additional inspection
and there are hundreds of thousands of
people really in Gaza desperately
waiting for food for medicine for
shelter and for protection in fact the
UN has already said that with the
ongoing War there's less and less uh
Supply available which means that the
trucks that are going in there risk of
being attacked simply by desperate
citizens we have all seen those pictures
of people trying to come through the
rubble underneath a bakery store that
was attacked trying to get bre
uh parents skipping meals uh in order to
make sure that the children are getting
food so the situation is really
desperate as a result that Crossing even
though it's not opening but the fact
that more inspection may be possible as
a result is as I say array of hope to
get at least a bit of more Aid in that
was our senior International
correspondent funny faar speaking to us
earlier from Jerusalem now the fighting
in Gaza is being closely watched by
Israel's neighbors though relations with
countries like Syria and Lebanon do
remain hostile there has been a long
slow thw with other longtime foes such
as Saudi Arabia meanwhile Qatar has
faciliated facilitated negotiations for
the release of hostages and prisoners
during the Israel Hamas conflict let's
take a look now at some of those
breakthrough moments that show how
things have been evolving in the
region a simple handshake that speaks
volumes Israel's president and the Emir
of Qatar at the c28 climate Summit the
first image ever to show the Amir with
an Israeli official while at the same
moment in Gaza the Qatar broken
ceasefire collapsed and War started back
up after seven quiet days Israel had
been developing better relations with
countries in the region including the
United Arab
Emirates and also katar which is both a
us and Hamas Ally and has emerged as an
effective negotiating partner although
it has no formal diplomatic ties with
Israel first there was Egypt Israel's
neighbor to the South the two have
fought several bitter Wars but in 1979
with us mediation signed a peace treaty
and Egypt became the first Arab country
to recognize Israel's right to exist
it's one of Israel's most strategically
vital allies especially when it comes to
Gaza Egypt helps Israel enforce its
blockade and coordinates on
security in 1994 Jordan Israel's
neighbor to the east signed a peace
treaty as well in 2020 Israel signs
agreements also known as the Abraham
Accords with the United Arab Emirates
and Bahrain with a blessing of the
Middle East Powerhouse Saudi
Arabia those were later followed by
normalization agreements with Sudan and
Morocco the biggest win for Israel will
be normalizing relations with Saudi
Arabia the US has been encouraging the
two to engage in talks one benefit for
the Saudis as well as other Gulf States
is they would gain an ally against arch
rival Iran one of hamas's prime sponsors
secret negotiations were reportedly
going on and then came hamas's terror
attack on on October the 7th Hamas
described the impending Saudi Israeli
diplomatic agreement as one of its main
reasons for the assault now no matter
how the war ends it's difficult to see a
path for Israel making major diplomatic
progress in the region without some kind
of a sustainable long-term solution for
the
Palestinians and for more I'm joined Now
by Ahmed abuda an associate fellow with
the chattam house Middle East and North
Africa program in London Mr abuda thanks
so much for your time today has Israel's
war with Hamas done irreparable damage
uh to its its diplomatic relationships
with the with the Arab
world I think we are living now the
lowest level of any Prospect of
relationship between Israel and the Arab
uh world since the second in Father uh I
think right now any talk between
diplomat Ral between Arab countries and
Israel will be toxic and very explosive
given the the the the grusome pictures
coming from Gaza with thousands of
civilians are being killed including uh
women and children uh but in the long
term I think the prospect still in the
table Saudi officials said that in the
beginning and I think this is the aim
for uh those countries who normalize
relations with Israel including bahin
UAE and
and even Saudi Arabia later mhm you've
spoken about the Dilemma that Arab
states face in having to to balance
showing support for the Palestinians
with their own uh strategic interests
could you explain to us what strategic
benefits for Arab states uh a
relationship with is Israel
offers so before the war we had a
reality
where some governments in the Arab world
so some strategic value in normalizing
their relations with Israel and this had
two Dimensions the first one is detering
Iran and balancing its influence all
over the region uh at a time the United
States has been seen as pivoting to Asia
to contain the rise of China and
focusing on the European theater
understandably because of the Ukrainian
the war in Ukraine um the second
dimension is this Tranquility moment
that the region was going through and
those governments wanted to build a new
Regional order based on infrastructure
connectivity trade and economic uh
integration and Hightech cooperation and
even military high-tech cooperation with
Israel now the war in Gaza proved that
bypassing the Palestinian question and
normalizing relations with Israel
without having the Palestinians on the
table or even some kind of peace between
pal Palestinians and Israel is not a
recipe for regional uh stability I think
normalization now in the short term is
seen as a very risky Endeavor and I
think it became unattractive in uh
option for those countries who didn't um
normalize with Israel until now
including Saudi Arabia let's take a
moment to look at it the other way
around how valuable are Regional
relationships to
Israel well Israel of course
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu made
it his ultimate uh objective strategic
objective to expand Israel's Outreach in
the Arab world and to uh formalize
relations with as many Arab countries as
possible and of course making Saudi
Arabia the ultimate goal which uh in his
view would open the Arab and Islamic uh
world to Israel and end its isolations
uh sort of on the Palestinian question
but by bypassing the Palestinian uh
cause and not uh having to sit down with
the Palestinian leadership to reach uh
peaceful negotiations or peaceful
resolution in the long term and I think
um this would create great opportunities
for Israel uh when it comes to security
cooperation with these countries which
is going on in the secret uh by the way
but not in public and of course
expanding its economic footprint um and
technological footprint all over the
middle
but it didn't
work among the countries that recently
nor normalized ties with Israel is
Bahrain as part of the Abraham Accords
in light of the war Bahrain has severed
those ties and recalled its Ambassador
but Israel says that their relations are
stable you just mentioned the difference
between what's going on in public and
behind the scenes I mean can we see
bahrain's move as more um you know to
prove its support of the Palestinians to
the world than an actual a diplomatic
breakup
I think uh Bahrain is a in a more
precarious situation that is because uh
in Bahrain there is a delicate uh Power
Balance domestic one between the Shia
and the sunnis uh populations uh I think
we've seen uh that the bahini leadership
is aware of the rising public anger we
have seen the lower uh champer in the
parliament in the beginning of the war
announcing cutting off diplomatic
relations with Israel which has been
walked back later and proved not to be
true but uh the bahrainis have been uh
adopting a low profile uh position
towards the Gaza War deliberately and
not taking the front seat and focusing
on not letting the war causing a
widespread discontent in the street and
also not letting Iran which has great
influence from a Bahraini perspective on
the Shia population use the war in its
own benefits I did want to mention Saudi
Arabia obviously very significant here
Riyad has refused to condemn the Hamas
um attacks on October the 7th apparently
though it's helped Israel by
intercepting a missile from Yemen again
there seems to be this difference
between what's being done publicly and
what's going on behind the
scenes I think uh we have to understand
first what Saudi Arabia wants Saudi
Arabia wants to see a permanent
ceasefire it wants to see the
humanitarian Aid going into Gaza
unimpeded and the longer term it wants
to see a peace uh resolution uh for this
conflict on uh two-state solution basis
uh at the same time it wants to use the
war to bolster its own Regional
leadership and we have seen Saudi Arabia
using its uh convening Power in both the
Arab and Islamic world now Saudi Arabia
has been balance has been adopting a
balancing act that is appeasing the
rising public anger in Saudi Arabia
which is very obvious on social media
but at the same time
it it it it wanted to adopt a watered
down language to preserve its long-term
interests whether that is with with
Israel or the United States so we have
seen on on on one hand the Saudi
leadership very aggressive towards
Israel even to the to the extent of
demanding a weapon embargo um imposed on
Israel but at the same time sticking to
the status quo language of two-state
solution based on the Arab peace
initiative which has been seen in some
quarters as as not compatible to the
exceptional moment the Middle East is
going through and interestingly recently
we have seen the Saudi official media
upping the ATI and being very aggressive
in criticizing Hamas and accusing it of
causing the agony and pain that the
Palestinians in Gaz are going through
now so to conclude I think the
normalization for Saudi Arabia is still
on the table and I think in the long
term um it has not been scrapped
altogether we are almost out of time but
I do do want to ask you in general what
would you say the Arab and Gulf States
see right now as a best possible outcome
in this war in the longer term I mean is
is a two-state Sol solution still on the
table I think first of all the Arab
countries do not want to to see the
Palestinians in Gaza being forcibly
displaced into the Sinai Peninsula I
think um they don't want to see any
change in the boundaries of Gaza STP
whether that is to create a buffer zone
as Benjamin nany has been uh demanding
um uh in the longer term I see the Arab
uh countries are playing some role in
reconstructing and financing the
Reconstruction of Gaza but I do not see
them wanting to play a central role in
maintaining Security in Gaza or running
governance after the war in the long
term I think they do want to see a
two-state solution based on the Arab uh
peace initiative or any kind of solution
that the Israelis and Palestinians would
agree on to be able to live peacefully
side by side in the future Ahmed Abu
from the international Affairs Think
Tank chattam house thank you so much for
your time and for your insights
today thank you for having
me Let's cross over to our special
correspondent a Ibrahim in Jerusalem a
Israel says that inspections will be
stepped up at the Karam Shalom Crossings
uh starting today that's supposed to
allow humanitarian supplies uh into the
into Gaza faster what kind of impact is
that likely to
have so they won't be stepped up they'll
actually be restarted the Kim Shalom
Crossing which was actually prior to the
war responsible for about 60% of all um
Goods coming in and out of the Gaza
Strip has been closed completely since
October 7th and so far for a to go
through the RAF Crossing uh uh between
Gaza and Egypt it it has to still be in
inspected by Israel because uh even
though Israel maintains it does uh not
occupy the Gaza Strip and that it has
withdrawn since 2005 it still maintains
according to the UN effective security
control so nothing can go in the strip
without Israel's permission and so the
Kim Shalom Crossing will be open for
inspection as an additional spot to
inspect goods and be approved by Israel
before they can then be routed to go in
uh through Egypt the impact um it will
certainly you know alleviate the
bottleneck that has um that is an aid
groups say has is now happening at
nitsana but at the same time we're again
talking just about inspection Israel
still maintains that no Aid will be
coming directly from Israel into Gaza
and of course there are the logistical
challenges of Distributing that Aid
effectively uh having it be secure
within the Gaza Strip again cannot be
emphasized enough one of the most
densely populated spots on Earth for
that's under bombing from Air since two
months more than two months and with an
ongoing ground operation 90% of the Gaza
strip's population has been
displaced virtually everybody there is
in desperate need of humanitarian Aid so
the challenges still uh you know will
still continue but at least there is
that Hope on the horizon with the
inspection bottleneck you know hopefully
being slightly alleviated in the coming
days
a how has this war in Gaza affected
Israel's relationship with its Arab
neighbors well let's start with its uh
you know its most immediate neighbors
the closest geographically if you will
you have Egypt and you have uh a Jordan
who have from the beginning been very
vocal calling uh for an end to uh the uh
hostilities and even though these are
you know the two as the report points
out the two countries with uh the oldest
peace treaties with with Israel um any
kind of talk of the mass displacement of
Palestinians is highly alarming to the
governments of both of these countries
and so there's a real sense by both
Egypt and Jordan that there's an attempt
by Israeli officials to displace the
people of Gaza and that they would be
the ones that would have to shoulder the
burden of that population and so the the
governments of these two countries even
though strategic partners of Israel on a
security level and certainly in to some
extent on an economic level have been
very wary of this possibility and have
pushed back
explicitly um against it then of course
there the gulf countries which are sort
of newer uh to the peace treaty uh uh to
you know have their peace treaties have
come more recently in the past couple of
years or
so and they as with Qatar have been
trying Qatar does not have a peace
treaty but it is you know a gulf country
the gulf countries have been trying to
play a mediating role to try and bring
in end uh to this conflict so even
though the Arab world is very diverse
different countries with different uh
goals there has been an attempt to at
least tow uh to find to strike a balance
between their strategic interests um and
of course the response that they're
getting from their populations and there
again a very diverse uh region different
religions different ethnicities but I
would say if there's one issue that is
universally emo across the Arab region
it's the Palestinian question it's seen
as a moral issue it's seen as an issue
of justice and to a certain extent also
um you know an issue of religious
oppression of course because Muslims you
know want Palestinians to have access to
their holy sites here in Jerusalem as
well which have been under restriction
by Israeli authorities over the past
years and there we've seen boycotts
attempts to boycott companies uh sorry
efforts to rather efforts to boycott
companies that have that are believed to
you know um be connected to Israel or
sponsor its government in any way anger
that that the region has I would say not
seen in decades on the Palestinian
question which has been to a large
extent sort of Forgotten and sort of
disappeared into the background giving
the turmoil in the region but is now
back center stage and is politicizing a
whole new generation of people in the
region getting them interested again in
that question and I think not doing
Israel any favors to win hearts and
Minds in the region something that the
isra Israeli government has long
wanted he thank you very much that was
our special correspondent a Ibrahim in
Jerusalem